I want to talk about the absolute
fastest way to build muscle. Now, a lot
of people will make this claim, but a
lot of people are also full of I'm
going to give you
my experiences along with some of the
published literature on the subject. A
bigger muscle is a stronger muscle, and
that's just a fact. Uh I know a lot of
people will say you got to count your
sets. That's what's more important than
high intensity. That's absolutely false.
High intensity is
it's really the only thing that works,
and I would say volume trainers, the
only time they get any growth is when
they really don't do a very good job of
counting their volume, and instead
actually go to fatigue.
Like by accident.
>> [music]
>> Hi, my name is John Jaquish. I'm a
doctor of biomedical engineering, which
gives me a unique perspective beyond
what a lot of sports scientists have to
say on the subject of performance,
strength, building muscle, nutrition,
all those associated subjects. Today, I
want to talk about the absolute fastest
way to build muscle. Now, a lot of
people will make this claim, but a lot
of people are also full of I'm
going to give you
my experiences along with some of the
published literature on the subject. Um
also, I'm going to point out where the
science has got it wrong, and I think
maybe by design got it wrong, as in it
was intentional to get it wrong. Uh I
know that's kind of a conspiracy theory,
but once I explain this, you're going to
it'll really open your eyes. So, what I
want to show you, and I'll I'll put this
up on screen, but this is my force bar
output screen for my deadlift. Now,
a couple things I want you to take note
of. I did 14 reps with my deadlift. Now,
not all of those were full reps, and as
you can see right here, they started
full, and they kind of start to trail
off. I'm also my my my average time up
was 1.49 seconds,
and I was slow on the down, 3.99
seconds. So, almost 4 seconds as I'm
coming down in the deadlift. So, very
slow and controlled. That's very
important for injury avoidance, but also
keep in mind, this is a deadlift,
which is a
a basically the entire backside of the
body exercise. I mean, traps, spinal
erectors, glutes, hamstrings, calves,
everything is is involved when it comes
to pulling off of the floor, but very
high peak forces. Uh the average peak
force at the top was 697 lb.
So, almost 700 lb at the top, and you
can see in the in the graph at the
bottom that the bottom of my rep was
about 300 lb. So, I was basically going
from 300 to 700 within that range of
motion. Now, when you look at that graph
on the bottom,
it's very important because you can see
each rep I came up, and slowly went
down,
but you can see the height and the width
of each one of those bumps in the sine
wave. You see at the bottom bottom of
this the screenshot here.
Each one of those is a little bit
smaller
every repetition. Why? It's because this
was so intense
that each repetition I'm starting to
lose velocity, which means I start off
with maximum muscular engagement. After
the first rep, you can see the sign the
sign bump is a little narrower.
And then, I progress four more
repetitions, and then I have another
wider repetition where I I I kept the
weight higher for a little bit longer,
but you notice the peak is down. So,
like ultimately, what gets counted in
that total force in that 28,000 lb of
force that are captured during this
deadlift is everything under the sine
wave.
So, the more you have more area you have
under the sine wave, the
better force production capacity you
delivered in each repetition. And so,
each rep, you see a little bit of
fatigue happening, a little bit of
fatigue, until the last repetition, I'm
getting only to maybe 500 lb, and I
could only handle it for maybe a couple
of seconds, like 1 second or something
like that, and then I dropped off, and I
realized that was complete fatigue.
Now,
this was one deadlift set.
I do this twice per week.
So, I do my deadlift, and then maybe
three or four days later, I do it again.
And that's it. That's all I do. That's
how high intensity this is with massive
accumulated fatigue. Now, the way I
manage my programming, I follow the
Westside Barbell X3 Academy, and you can
find that on our website, and I use the
force bar to measure.
So, it's 4 days a week of training. It's
about half an hour each workout. There's
some other stuff that goes in there
other than X3. A lot of athletic
movements. There's some some jumping,
some landing, some general calisthenics
for uh
I think I think they call it general
preparedness. You're always ready to
deliver from an athletic standpoint.
Like, you don't want to be an individual
who might be able to lift a weight, but
like
you you could pull a muscle getting off
the couch. You you don't want to be that
guy. Like, you you actually want to wire
your body so that you can move and and
behave like an actual athlete, which is
really a huge thing in the Westside
Barbell programming, not in my original
programming. Mostly because that's not
really my field of expertise. That's
theirs. And I don't I don't like I could
have just like Googled some stuff and
cobbled it together. I really I don't
like that. I I want to do the thing that
I'm good at, and if I'm not the best at
it, I want to recommend who's the best.
I do the same thing with nutrition.
Like, that's why I tell people to follow
Professor Bart Kay,
uh Dr. Anthony Chaffee, Dr. Shawn Baker
for nutrition. I definitely will echo a
lot of the things that they say, but
those are the people you should really
be following for the optimal nutrition
advice. When I train like this, and this
is what my sets look like. I only do two
sets a week separated by a couple of
days for this exercise, and and really
for all of them,
but I get stronger every single workout.
Significantly. Usually beat my total
force number by 1,000 lb each each time.
At least lately, it's been going that
way since uh
since I got back from Mexico. My last my
last trip, I've really been focused on
just smashing these numbers every single
time, because ultimately, a bigger
muscle is a stronger muscle, and that's
just a fact. Uh I know a lot of people
will say you got to count your sets.
That's what's more important than high
intensity. That's absolutely false. High
intensity is
it's really the only thing that works,
and I would say volume trainers, the
only time they get any growth is when
they really don't do a very good job of
counting their volume, and instead
actually go to fatigue.
Like by accident. That may be the only
thing that drives them. And I'm going to
do another video on how I know this.
That's really the way it works. What
what I'm talking about is is similar to
what Arthur Jones was talking about,
Mike Mentzer,
uh and now Dorian Yates is is really
promoting
this. And what he says is, if you're not
getting stronger every workout,
take a few days off,
and return with an abbreviated program.
And that's what I have done using the
Westside Barbell
X3 Academy, and just ratcheted back just
a little bit each time I don't get
stronger, and I take about 3 or 4 days
off,
return, slightly abbreviated program,
and I'm getting stronger every single
time. I'm getting bigger every single
time. I scale weight. I don't track it
that much, but like I mean, I can I can
see with with the musculature,
especially now I'm a little bit leaner,
it's easier to see, and coincidentally,
you are more anabolic when you are
leaner.
Something to keep in mind. You should
probably write that down. I hope this
analysis helped. If you have any
questions, also, I want to point out,
you don't need to get the force bar,
which is where this graphic came from.
It's expensive. It's $950. There's an
upgrade for a little bit less if you
already have X3, but what I suggest is
the the free app, and then the regular
X3. You count your full repetitions, and
you count your lengthened partials, or
just partial repetitions when you do the
diminishing range.
That is just as good, and you'll get not
as accurate as this, but you'll get an
accurate count of what you're doing, and
so you can check and make sure you're
getting stronger every single time,
because that makes you bigger every
single time.
Ask me questions in the comments. If you
think I'm wrong, I'll be thrilled to
argue with you, but bring research. If
you think I'm right, please mention
that, too, cuz I like that a lot.
Thanks. See you on the next one. If this
video helped you, I want you to
subscribe and follow. I'm going to put
out videos on a regular basis. I think
they're going to help a whole lot of
people, especially if you're one of
those people that doesn't just instantly
grow from lifting regular weights,
>> [music]
>> we've got the answer for you.